HYPERTENSION AS A CARDIOVASCULAR RISK FACTOR

2

Renata Cifkova and Peter J. Blankestijn

HYPERTENSION AS A CARDIOVASCULAR RISK FACTOR Hypertension is the most
prevalent cardiovascular disorder, affecting 20–50% of the adult
population worldwide, and ranking, in a comparative risk assessment of
84 risk factors and risk factor clusters, high for global disease burden
(1). Likewise, it has been identified as a risk factor for coronary
heart disease, stroke, peripheral arterial disease and heart and renal
failure in both men and women in a large number of epidemiological
studies (2– 5). Hypertension has also been shown to increase the risk of
atrial fibrillation (6). In addition, observational studies have found
that blood pressure (BP) correlates inversely with cognitive function
and that hypertension is associated with an increased incidence of
dementia (7,8). In the year 2001, the worldwide burden of disease
attributable to high systolic BP (≥115 mmHg) was 54% for stroke, and 47%
for ischaemic heart disease (9). About half of this burden was
experienced by individuals with hypertension, the other part in those
with a lesser degree of high BP. More than 80% of the attributable
burden of the disease was found in low- and middle-income regions. A
meta-analysis of individual data of one million adults from 61
prospective observational studies found a continuous graded independent
relationship with the risk of stroke and coronary events (10). Coronary
heart disease (CHD) and stroke mortality increases progressively and
linearly from BP levels as low as 115 mmHg systolic and 75 mmHg
diastolic upward (Figures 2.1 and 2.2). The increased risks are seen in
all age groups from 40 to 89 years of age. For every 20 mmHg systolic or
10 mmHg diastolic BP increase, there is a doubling of mortality from CHD
and stroke.

ASSESSMENT OF TOTAL CARDIOVASCULAR RISK IN HYPERTENSION INTRODUCTION
Historically, hypertension guidelines long focused on BP values as the
only or main variables determining

therapeutic interventions. Although this approach was maintained in the
2003 Joint National Committee (JNC) seven guidelines (11) and was found
cost effective (12), the ESH-ESC guidelines have since 2003 (13–15)
emphasized that management of hypertension should be related to
quantification of total cardiovascular (CV) risk. Finally, this approach
was also adopted by the most recent US hypertension guidelines (16). The
rationale for this approach is that only a small proportion of the
hypertensive population has an elevation of BP alone with the great
majority exhibiting additional CV risk factors (17–21), with a
relationship between the severity of BP elevation and that of
alterations in glucose and lipid metabolism (22). When elevated BP and
metabolic risk factors are concomitantly present, they potentiate each
other risk (17,23,24). Thresholds and goals for antihypertensive
treatment as well as treatment strategies for concomitant risk factors
may differ based on total CV risk. Therefore, estimation of total CV
risk is essential for guiding patient management. The use of total CV
risk estimation may also improve physicians’ behaviour in drug
prescription and patient adherence (25,26); however, there are some
reports showing no impact on provider behaviours (27) and inadequate use
in routine clinical practice (28,29).

HOW TO ASSESS TOTAL CV RISK A number of complex and computerized methods
have been developed for estimating total CV risk, that is, the
likelihood of experiencing a CV event, usually within the next 10 years.
Many risk stratification systems are based on the Framingham study (30),
estimating the 10-year risk for both fatal and nonfatal CHD by systolic
BP and presence of other risk factors. The easy and rapid calculation of
the Framingham risk score using published tables (National Cholesterol
Education Program \[NCEP\]) (31) may assist the physician and patient in
demonstrating the benefits of treatment. The Framingham risk
stratification has been shown to be reasonably applicable to some
European populations (32) but requiring recalibration in other
populations (33,34) due to geographic differences in the incidence of
coronary and stroke events.

8 Manual of Hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension

(a) 

Systolic blood pressure

(b) 

Diastolic blood pressure Age at risk:

Age at risk: 256

80–89 years

256

128

70–79 years

128

70–79 years

64 60–69 years

32

50–59 years

16 8 4

Stroke mortality (floating absolute risk and 95% CI)

64 Stroke mortality (floating absolute risk and 95% CI)

80–89 years

32

8 4 2

1

1

140

160

180

Usual systolic blood pressure (mmHg)

50–59 years

16

2

120

60–69 years

70

80

90

100

110

Usual diastolic blood pressure (mmHg)

Figure 2.1 Stroke mortality rate in each decade of age plotted for the
usual systolic (a) and diastolic (b) blood pressure at

the start of that decade. Data from 1 million adults in 61 prospective
studies. (Adapted from Lewington S et al. Lancet 2002; 360(10):
1903–1913.)

The latest US hypertension guidelines (16) recommend use of the ACC/AHA
Pooled Cohort Equation (http://tools. acc.org/ASCVD-Risk-Estimator/) to
estimate the 10-year risk of atherosclerotic CVD (ASCVD) to establish
the BP threshold for treatment (35). Given the need for a European model
based on a large database, the SCORE (Systemic Coronary Risk Evaluation)
project (36) was used to develop SCORE charts for highand low-risk
countries in Europe estimating the risk of dying from CV (not just
coronary) disease over 10 years, and allowing calibration of the charts
for individual countries provided that national mortality statistics and
estimates of the prevalence of major CV risk factors are available. The
SCORE model has also been used in the HeartScore, the official European
Society of Cardiology management tool for implementation of CVD
prevention in clinical practice (http://www.escardio.org). The main
disadvantage associated with an intervention threshold based on
relatively short-term absolute risk is that younger adults (particularly
women), while having more than one risk factor, are unlikely to reach
treatment thresholds despite being at high risk relative to their peers.
By contrast, most elderly men (e.g., those aged 65) will often reach
treatment thresholds whilst being at very little increased risk relative
to their peers. This situation results in most resources being
concentrated on the oldest

subjects whose potential lifespan, despite intervention, is relatively
limited, while young subjects at high relative risk remain untreated
despite, in the absence of intervention, a predicted significant
shortening of their otherwise much longer potential lifespan (37,38).
Use of the SCORE chart for estimating total CV risk in hypertension
should be considered a minimal requirement taking into account the fact
that total CV risk can be underestimated (39). On the basis of these
considerations, the 2013 ESH-ESC guidelines (15) suggest total CV risk
be stratified as shown in Table 2.1. The terms low (&lt;1%), moderate
(≥1 and &lt;5%), high (≥5 and &lt;10%) and very high (≥10%) risk refer
to the 10-year risk of CV mortality as defined by the 2012 ESC
prevention guidelines (40). The factors on which this stratification is
based are listed in Table 2.2. They include risk factors, asymptomatic
organ damage, diabetes mellitus and established CV or renal disease.

SEARCHING FOR SUBCLINICAL (ASYMPTOMATIC) ORGAN DAMAGE Given the
importance of subclinical organ damage as an intermediate stage in the
continuum of vascular disease

Hypertension as a Cardiovascular Risk Factor 9

(a) 

Systolic blood pressure

(b) 

Diastolic blood pressure

80–89 years

256

128

70–79 years

128

64

60–69 years

64

32

50–59 years

16

IHD mortality (floating absolute risk and 95% CI)

IHD mortality (floating absolute risk and 95% CI)

Age at risk: 256

40–49 years

8 4

60–69 years 50–59 years

40–49 years

8 4

1

1

180

70–79 years

16

2

140 160 Usual systolic blood pressure (mmHg)

80–89 years

32

2

120

Age at risk:

70

80 90 100 Usual diastolic blood pressure (mmHg)

110

Figure 2.2 Ischaemic heart disease (IHD) mortality rate in each decade
of age plotted for the usual systolic (a) and diastolic (b) blood
pressure at the start of that decade. Data from one million adults in 61
prospective studies. (Adapted from Lewington S et al. Lancet 2002;
360(10): 1903–1913.)

and as a determinant of overall CV risk, signs of organ involvement in
hypertensive individuals should be sought for carefully, using
appropriate techniques. The presence of any of the four following
markers, that is, increased urinary albumin excretion (UAE), increased
pulse wave velocity (PW V), left ventricular

Table 2.1

hypertrophy (LVH), and carotid plaques, predicts CV mortality
independently of SCORE stratification (41–43). This is an argument
favouring routine use of organ damage assessment, particularly in
specialized centres or clinics. The risk increases with the number of
damaged organs (41).

Stratification of total CV risk

Other risk factors, asymptomatic organ damage or disease

Blood pressure (mmHg) High normal SBP 130–139 or DBP 85–89

No other RF

Grade 1 HT SBP 140–159 or DBP 90–99

Grade 2 HT SBP 160–179 or DBP 100–109

Grade 3 HT SBP ≥180 or DBP ≥110

Low risk

Moderate risk

High risk

1–2 RF

Low risk

Moderate risk

Moderate to high risk

High risk

≥3 RF

Low to moderate risk

Moderate to high risk

High risk

High risk

OD, CKD stage 3 or diabetes

Moderate to high risk

High risk

High risk

High to very high risk

Symptomatic CVD, CKD stage ≥4 or diabetes with OD/RFs

Very high risk

Very high risk

Very high risk

Very high risk

BP = blood pressure; CKD = chronic kidney disease; CV = cardiovascular;
CVD = cardiovscular disease; DBP = diastolic blood pressure; HT =
hypertension; OD = organ damage; RF = risk factor; SBP = systolic blood
pressure.

10 Manual of Hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension

Table 2.2 Factors − other than office BP − influencing prognosis; used
for stratification of total CV risk

HEART

Risk factors ■■ Male sex ■■ Age (men ≥55 years; women ≥65 years) ■■
Smoking ■■ Dyslipidemia ■■ Total cholesterol &gt;4.9 mmol/L (190 mg/dL);
and/or ■■ LDL-cholesterol &gt;3.0 mmol/L (115 mg/dL); and/or ■■
HDL-cholesterol: men &lt;1.0 mmol/L (40 mg/dL), women &lt;1.2 mmol/L (46
mg/dL); and/or ■■ Triglycerides &gt;1.7 mmol/L (150 mg/dL) ■■ Fasting
plasma glucose 5.6–6.9 mmol/L (102–125 mg/dL) ■■ Abnormal glucose
tolerance test ■■ Obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m2) ■■ Abdominal obesity (waist
circumference: men ≥102 cm, women ≥88 cm in Caucasians) ■■ Family
history of premature CV disease (men aged &lt;55 years; women aged
&lt;65 years)

ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY

Asymptomatic organ damage Pulse pressure (in the elderly) ≥60 mmHg ■■
Left ventricular hypertrophy ■■ Electrocardiogram: Sokolow-Lyon index
&gt;3.5 mV; RaVL &gt;1.1 mV; Cornell voltage duration product &gt;244 mV
× ms; or ■■ Echocardiogram: LVM indexa: men &gt;115 g/m2; women &gt;95
g/m2 ■■ Carotid wall thickening (IMT &gt;0.9 mm) or plaque ■■
Carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity &gt;10 m/s ■■ Ankle-brachial index
&lt;0.9 ■■ CKD with eGFR (30–60 mL/min/1.73 m2) ■■ Microalbuminuria
30–300 mg/24 h or albumin-creatinine ratio 30–300 mg/g; 3.4–34 mg/mmol
preferentially in morning spot urine ■■

Diabetes mellitus ■■ Fasting plasma glucose ≥7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL) on 2
repeated measurements; and/or ■■ HbA1c &gt;7% (53 mmol/mol); and/or ■■
Post-load plasma glucose &gt;11.0 mmol/L (198 mg/dL) Established CV or
renal disease ■■ Cerebrovascular disease: Ischaemic stroke Cerebral
haemorrhage Transient ischaemic attack ■■ CHD: Myocardial infarction
Angina Coronary revascularization with PCI or CABG Heart failure ■■
Heart failure, including heart failure with preserved EF ■■ Symptomatic
lower extremities PAD ■■ CKD with eGFR &lt;30 mL/min/1.73 m2;
proteinuria (&gt;300 mg/24 h) ■■ Advanced retinopathy: Haemorrhages or
exudates Papilledema Source: Adapted from Mancia G et al. J Hypertens
2013; 31(15): 1281–1357. Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; CABG,
coronary artery bypass grafting; CHD, coronary heart disease; CKD,
chronic kidney disease; CV, ­cardiovascular; EF, ejection fraction;
eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; HbA1c, glycated hemoglobin;
HDL-C, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol; IMT, intima-media
thickness; LDL-C, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; LVM, left
ventricular mass; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; PWV, pulse
wave velocity. a Risk maximal for concentric LVH: increased LVM index
with a wall thickness to radius ratio of 0.42.

Electrocardiography (EKG) is part of routine assessment of hypertensive
individuals in order to detect LVH, pattern of ‘strain’, ischemia and
arrhythmias. Its sensitivity in detecting LVH is low; nonetheless
hypertrophy detected by SokolowLyons index, modified Sokolow-Lyons index
(largest S wave plus largest R wave &gt;3.5 mV) or by Cornell voltage
QRS duration is an independent predictor of CV events (44). In a
prospective survey including 7495 American adults, a new indicator of
LVH, the Novacode estimate of left ventricular mass index (LVMI) (based
on both voltage and strain pattern criteria), has been reported to be
significantly related to 10-year CV mortality (45). A further analysis
from the LIFE (Losartan Intervention For Endpoint reduction in
hypertension) trial has shown that hypertensive patients with EKG LVH or
left bundle branch block are at increased risk of CV mortality and
hospitalization for heart failure (46). A prospective study by
Verdecchia et al. (47) documented that R-wave voltage in aVL is closely
associated with left ventricular mass (LVM) and predictive of CV events
when hypertension is not accompanied by EKG LVH. The prevalence of EKG
LVH increases the severity of hypertension (48). Electrocardiography
seems to be valuable at least in patients over 55 years of age (49,50).
Electrocardiographic ST-T abnormalities are often present in conjunction
with EKG LVH. Adding EKG repolarization changes to EKG voltage and QRS
duration may improve the detection of LVH (51). It can also be used to
detect LV strain indicating higher risk (44,49). In the LIFE study, new
development of EKG strain was a strong predictor of adverse outcome in
the setting of EKG LVH regression (52). Longer QRS duration is an
independent predictor of sudden cardiac death and heart failure in
patients with hypertension (52,54). Electrocardiography and/or 24-hour
Holter EKG monitoring play crucial roles in detecting atrial
fibrillation, an independent predictor of adverse outcomes such as
stroke, heart failure and CV mortality in hypertensive patients (55).
There is growing evidence that new-onset atrial fibrillation should be
considered target-organ damage (56). ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY (TWO-DIMENSIONAL
TRANSTHORACIC)

Standard two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography (2D-TTE) is more
sensitive than electrocardiography in diagnosing LVH (57) and predicting
CV and renal risk (58); it may also be more helpful in risk
stratification (59). There are also some technical limitations such as
interobserver variability, low-quality imaging in obese individuals and
in patients with obstructive lung disease. Although the relation between
LVMI and CV risk is continuous, thresholds of 115 g/m2 for men and 95
g/m2 for women are widely used for conservative estimates of LVH (60).
Concentric hypertrophy (wall-to-radius ratio ≥0.42 with an increased
LVM), eccentric hypertrophy (increased LVM and wall-to-radius ratio
&lt;0.42), and concentric remodelling (wall-to-radius ratio ≥0.42 with
normal LVM) all predict an increased incidence of CVD, but concentric
hypertrophy has consistently been shown to be associated with the
highest risk (61–63). In addition, echocardiography is a tool for
assessing left ventricular systolic and diastolic function; ejection

Hypertension as a Cardiovascular Risk Factor 11

Table 2.3 Definitions of LVH, concentric geometry, left ventricular
chamber, systolic/diastolic function and LA dilation Parameter

Measure

Cutoff point

LVH

LV mass/height2 (g/m2)

Men &gt; 50 Women &gt; 47

LVH

LV mass/BSA (g/m2)

Men &gt; 115 Women &gt; 95

LV concentric geometry

RWT

≥0.43

LV chamber size

LV end-diastolic diameter/ height (cm/m)

Men &gt; 3.3 Women &gt; 3.4

Systolic function

LV ejection fraction (%)

> 55

Diastolic function

Septal e′ velocity (cm/s) Lateral e′ velocity (cm/s)

&lt;8 &lt;10

LV filling pressures

E/e′ (averaged) ratio

≥13

LA size (Simpson)

LA volume/BSA (mL/m2)

≥34

LA size (elliptical)

LA volume/height2 (mL/m2)

Men &gt; 17.7 Women &gt; 16.7

Abbreviations: BSA, body surface area; LA, left atrial; LV, left
ventricular; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; RWT, relative wall
thickness.

fraction as well as midwall fractional shortening have been proposed as
possible additional predictors of CV events. Alterations of diastolic
function (i.e. alterations of LV relaxation and filling) are frequent in
hypertensives, and particularly in the elderly (64).
Hypertension-induced diastolic dysfunction is associated with concentric
geometry and can induce symptoms/signs of heart failure, even when
ejection fraction (EF) is still normal (heart failure with preserved EF)
(65). Diastolic dysfunction is associated with increased risk of atrial
fibrillation (66), heart failure (67) and increased total mortality
(68). Filling abnormalities can be quantified by Doppler transmitral
inflow pattern and predict heart failure and all-cause mortality
(67,69). Finally, echocardiography provides information on the size of
the left atrium; left atrial enlargement is associated with a higher
risk of atrial fibrillation, CVD and death (70–73). Normal ranges and
cutoff values of parameters to be included in the echocardiographic
report are listed in Table 2.3. Subclinical systolic dysfunction can be
assessed using speckle-tracking echocardiography to quantify
longitudinal contractile function (longitudinal strain). OTHER CARDIAC
IMAGING TECHNIQUES

While three-dimensional echocardiography (3DE) is a more reliable method
for quantitative analysis, and for LVM in particular, there is limited
evidence for 3DE reference values and prognostic validation (74).
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging is the gold standard for cardiac
anatomical and functional quantification; it has the same limitations as
3DE and is more expensive. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging should be
used when 2D-TTE or 3DE is unavailable and LV geometry is important for
the decision to treat.

BLOOD VESSELS CAROTID ARTERIES

Ultrasound examination of the carotid arteries with measurement of
intima-media thickness (IMT) or the presence of plaques have been shown
to predict stroke and myocardial infarction (75,76). The relationship
between carotid IMT and CV events is a continuous one but, for the
common carotid arteries, an IMT &gt;0.9 mm is considered abnormal (77).
Ultrasound scans limited to the common carotid arteries (an infrequent
site of atherosclerosis) are likely to measure vascular hypertrophy
only, whereas assessment of atherosclerosis also requires scanning of
the bifurcations and/or internal carotids where plaques are more
frequent (78–80). Further analysis from European Lacidipine Study on
Atherosclerosis (ELSA) (81) has shown baseline carotid IMT (both at
carotid bifurcations and at the level of the common carotid artery)
predicts CV events independent of BP (clinic and ambulatory). This
suggests that both atherosclerosis (reflected by the IMT at
bifurcations) and vascular hypertrophy (reflected by the common carotid
IMT) exert an adverse prognostic effect in addition to that of high BP.
Quantitative B-mode ultrasound of carotid arteries requires training and
methodological standardization for IMT measurement. Lack of
standardization regarding the definition and measurement of IMT were
responsible for high variability and low intra-individual
reproducibility. A meta-analysis failed to show any added value of IMT
compared with the Framingham risk score in predicting future CVD even in
the intermediate risk group (82). Thus, the 2016 European guidelines on
CVD prevention in clinical practice do not recommend systematic use of
carotid IMT to improve risk assessment (83). Presence of a plaque can be
identified by an IMT &gt;1.3 or 1.5 mm, or by a focal increase in
thickness of 0.5 mm or 50% of the surrounding IMT value (78–80). There
is evidence that, in untreated hypertensive individuals without
target-organ damage by routinely performed tests, these alterations are
common and thus carotid ultrasound examination may often detect vascular
damage and make risk stratification more precise (39). An adverse
prognostic significance of carotid plaques (hazard ratio 2.3) has also
been reported in a sample of Copenhagen county residents free of overt
CVD, followed for about 13 years (84). Carotid plaque has a stronger
predictive value for both stroke and myocardial infarction, higher than
that of IMT and independent of traditional CV risk factors. The presence
of a carotid plaque automatically reclassifies patients from
intermediate to high risk (77); however, routine carotid ultrasound
imaging is not recommended unless there is a clinical indication (bruit,
previous TIA or stroke). ANKLE-BRACHIAL INDEX

A low ankle-brachial index (ABI, &lt;0.9) signals peripheral arterial
disease and, in general, advanced atherosclerosis (85,86), whereas
carotid IMT measurements are able to detect earlier changes. A reduced
ABI (&lt;0.9) relates to further development of angina, myocardial
infarction, congestive heart failure, need for coronary artery bypass
surgery, stroke, carotid and peripheral vascular surgery (87–90) and in
patients with multivessel coronary disease, it confers additional risk
(91).

12 Manual of Hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension

PULSE WAVE VELOCITY

Large artery stiffening has been identified as the most important
pathophysiological determinant of isolated systolic hypertension and
age-related pulse pressure increase (92). Measurement of carotid-femoral
pulse wave velocity (PWV) provides a comprehensive noninvasive
assessment of arterial stiffness (93). Carotid-femoral PWV is currently
considered the gold standard for large artery stiffening, a measure
shown to have an independent predictive value for all-cause mortality
and CV morbidity, coronary events and strokes in patients with
uncomplicated essential hypertension (94–98). Reference values for PWV
are available from 16,867 subjects enrolled in 13 different centres in
eight European countries (99). A PWV &gt;10 m/s is considered a
conservative estimate of an abnormal value in middle-aged hypertensive
patients (100). The additive predictive value of PWV beyond traditional
risk scoring systems (including SCORE and the Framingham Risk Score) has
been shown by the Copenhagen county population (84). Indirect indices of
aortic stiffness and wave reflection such as central blood pressure and
augmentation index have been confirmed as independent predictors of CV
events in two studies (101,102). In one of these studies, only central
systolic blood pressure consistently and independently predicted CV
mortality after adjustment for various CV risk factors including LVM and
carotid IMT (102). In the Conduit Artery Function Evaluation (CAFE)
study, a substudy of Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial (ASCOT),
central pulse pressure was significantly associated with a post
hoc-defined composite outcome of fatal

CV events/procedures and development of renal impairment (103). The BP
GUIDE study (104) showed that management of hypertension guided by
central aortic blood pressure (compared with best practice care) was
associated with less use of medication to achieve BP control. In
conclusion, PWV may be useful in refining risk stratification in
selected patients but is not yet recommended for routine practice.

KIDNEY The diagnosis of induced renal damage is based on the finding of
a reduced renal function and/or the detection of elevated UAE (105).
Renal function is represented mainly by glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
depending on the number and function of nephrons and decreasing with age
after the third decade (progressive loss of 1% per year). Renal function
is currently classified based on the estimated glomerular filtration
rate (eGFR) calculated using various formulas, of which the 2009 CKD EPI
formula seems to be the most reliable for a wide range of patients
(106). Values of eGFR &lt;60 mL/min/1.73 m2 indicate chronic kidney
disease (CKD) stage 3, whilst values &lt;30 and &lt;15 mL/min/1.73 m2
indicate CKD stages 4 and 5 (kidney failure), respectively (107) (Table
2.4). A reduction in GFR and an increase in CV risk are also reflected
in increased serum cystatin C (108). While elevated serum creatinine or
low eGFR (or creatinine clearance) indicate reduced glomerular
filtration, an

Table 2.4 Prognosis of CKD by GFR and albuminuria category Persistent
albuminuria categories description and range

GFR categories (ml/min per 1.73 m2) description and range

Prognosis of CKD by GFR and albuminuria categories: KDIGO 2012

G1

Normal or high

≥90

G2

Midly decreased

60–89

G3a

Midly to moderately decreased

45–59

G3b

Moderately to severely decreased

30–44

G4

Severely decreased

15–29

G5

Kideney failure

A1

A2

A3

Normal to mildly increased

Moderately increased

Severely increased

&lt;30 mg/g &lt;3 mg/mmol

30–300 mg/g 3–30 mg/mmol

> 300 mg/g 30 mg/mmol

&lt;15

Green: low risk (if no other markers of kidney disease, no CKD); yellow:
moderately increased risk; orange: high risk; red, very high risk.
Abbreviations: CKD, chronic kidney disease; GFR, glomerular filtration
rate.

Hypertension as a Cardiovascular Risk Factor 13

increase in urinary albumin or protein excretion reflects derangement in
the glomerular filtration barrier. UAE has been shown to predict the
development of overt diabetic nephropathy in both type 1 and 2 diabetics
(109), while the presence of overt proteinuria generally indicates the
presence of established renal parenchymal damage (110). Urinary albumin
excretion, even below the current threshold values, has been shown to
predict CV events in both diabetic and nondiabetic hypertensive patients
(111,112). There is a continuous relationship between CV and nonCV
mortality and urinary protein excretion (113,114). Albuminuria can be
measured from spot urine samples, preferably early morning urine
(24-hour or night urine samples are discouraged due to the inaccuracy of
urine collection) by indexing the urinary albumin concentration to the
urinary creatinine concentration (107). Progressive reduction in eGFR
and increased albuminuria indicate progressive loss of renal function
towards end-stage renal disease and are both independent predictors of
increased CV risk in diabetic and nondiabetic kidney disease (115). The
presence of both increased albuminuria and reduced eGFR is associated
with a greater risk of renal and CV complications (Table 2.4).
Hyperuricemia is frequently seen in untreated hypertensives
(particularly in pre-eclampsia) and has also been shown to correlate
with reduced renal blood flow and in the presence of nephrosclerosis
(116). Serum creatinine, eGFR and urinalysis, including measurement of
albumin-to-creatinine ratio, are considered routine laboratory tests to
be performed in all hypertensive patients and to be repeated at least
annually.

RETINAL VESSELS Most hypertensive patients usually present early in the
process of their disease, and haemorrhages and exudates (grade 3) and
papilledema (grade 4) are observed very rarely but are highly
reproducible and always associated with an increased risk of CV events
(117,118). On the other hand, grade 1 (focal or general arteriolar
narrowing) and 2 (arteriovenous nipping) retinal changes are reported
much more frequently than other subclinical organ damage with documented
clinical significance (LVH, carotid plaques and albuminuria), but the
prognostic significance of these mild retinal changes has been
questioned (119–122) and their reproducibility is limited. These changes
appear to be largely nonspecific except for young patients, in whom a
deviation from an entirely normal retina should raise concern. More
selective methods for objective assessment of the eye fundus have been
developed; for example digitalized retinal photographs, which showed
that retinal arteriolar and venular narrowing may precede the
development of hypertension (123,124).

BRAIN Hypertension is associated with an increased risk of ischaemic and
haemorrhagic stroke and vascular brain ­ injury (VBI) (125). Brain
imaging in hypertension may be used to detect VBI, considered a sign of
cerebral small vessel disease (SVD) and an important mediator of the
relationship between hypertension and brain ageing. Cerebral SVD

is associated with cognitive, psychiatric and physical disabilities
contributing to the risk of stroke, cognitive dysfunction and dementia
(126–128). The following signs of VBI can be recognized on brain
imaging: white matter hyperintensity, cerebral microbleeds, recent small
subcortical infarcts, lacunes, dilated perivascular space and atrophy
(129). Several studies have shown that VBI detected using magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) is quite common in the general population
(126,130), with prevalence increasing with age and hypertension. The
availability and cost considerations do not allow widespread use of MRI
in the evaluation of elderly patients, but silent brain infarcts should
be sought in all hypertensives with neural disturbance, and particularly
memory loss. Cognitive tests should be used in the clinical assessment
of elderly hypertensives (131).

PROGNOSTIC VALUE OF TREATMENT-INDUCED AND MULTIORGAN SUBCLINICAL ORGAN
DAMAGE Treatment-induced changes in organ damage affect the incidence of
CV events, hence organ damage should be assessed also during treatment
(132) because LVH regression and reduction of urinary protein excretion
indicate treatment-induced CV protection (132,133). There is also some
evidence that treatment-induced changes in eGFR predict CV events
(134–140). On the other hand, two meta-analyses did not show any
predictive value of treatment-induced reduction in carotid IMT for CV
events (141,142). There is no or limited evidence for the predictive
power of treatment-induced changes in PWV and ABI. Whenever possible, a
search for subclinical organ damage should be made simultaneously in
various organs, because multiorgan subclinical organ damage is
associated with a worse prognosis. A population-based study from Denmark
showed that subclinical organ damage predicted CV death independently of
SCORE and use of the combination of SCORE and subclinical organ damage
may improve risk prediction, particularly in subjects with moderate CV
risk, by assessing UAE and PWV (41). Regression of target-organ damage
may not be achieved even under satisfactory BP control. Some changes may
be irreversible because they are too advanced. Blood pressure-lowering
treatment can also prevent develop­ ment of target-organ damage (143).
If target-organ damage develops during antihypertensive treatment, it
may be associated with an increased risk (53). In conclusion, it is
important to assess target-organ damage on treatment; if there is
target-organ damage at baseline, its evaluation should be repeated at
least once during the first year of effective BP control. If there is no
target-organ damage at baseline, the reassessment may be postponed.
REFERENCES 1. GBD 2015 Risk Factors Collaborators. Global, regional, and
national comparative risk assessment of 79 behavioural, environmental
and occupational, and metabolic risks or clusters of risks, 1990-2015: A
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet
2016; 388: 1659–1724.


